NOISSUE - Update magistrala messaging (#188)
absmach/magistrala-docs: docs/messaging.md

Reviewer: To send and receive messages over MQTT, you can use[Mosquitto tools][mosquitto]. If you prefer to use MQTT over WebSocket, you can use [Paho][paho].

Reviewer: To send and receive messages over MQTT, you can use [Mosquitto tools][mosquitto]. If you prefer to use MQTT over WebSocket, you can use [Paho][paho].

Reviewer: To subscribe to channel, thing should send following request:

# Messaging

Once a channel is provisioned and thing is connected to it, it can start to publish messages on the channel. The following sections will provide an example of message publishing for each of the supported protocols, with the examples being shown without TLS, with TLS, and with mTLS.

> > While using MTLS the `thing.crt` and `thing.crt` can be genarated by running `make thing_cert` while in the `docker/ssl` folder

Reviewer 2: thing.key and thing crt.

> > While using MTLS the `thing.crt` and `thing.crt` can be genarated by running `make thing_cert` while in the `docker/ssl` folder

Reviewer 2: Also as it is mtls would it be more appropriate to have magistrala-client.key and magistrala-client.crt

## HTTP

> The following environmental variables are used to enable or disable HTTP with TLS and MTLS: `MG_HTTP_ADAPTER_CERT_FILE`,`MG_HTTP_ADAPTER_KEY_FILE`, `MG_HTTP_ADAPTER_SERVER_CA_FILE`, `MG_HTTP_ADAPTER_CLIENT_CA_FILE`. These can be located in the `docker/.env` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following environment variables are used to enable or disable HTTP with TLS and MTLS: `MG_HTTP_ADAPTER_CERT_FILE`,`MG_HTTP_ADAPTER_KEY_FILE`, `MG_HTTP_ADAPTER_SERVER_CA_FILE`, `MG_HTTP_ADAPTER_CLIENT_CA_FILE`. These can be located in the `docker/.env` file.
```

### Without TLS

> To use magistala HTTP without TLS, comment out all of the listed environment variables provided above. To publish message over channel, thing should send following request:

Reviewer 2: You can also mention or provide an example for subscribing.

```bash

> curl -s -S -i -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/senml+json" -H "Authorization: Thing <thing_secret>" http://localhost/http/channels/<channel_id>/messages -d '[{"bn":"some-base-name:","bt":1.276020076001e+09, "bu":"A","bver":5, "n":"voltage","u":"V","v":120.1}, {"n":"current","t":-5,"v":1.2}, {"n":"current","t":-4,"v":1.3}]'

Reviewer 3: For all examples add expected outputs

```

### With MTLS

To use magistala HTTP with MTLS, uncomment all of the environment variables listed above. To publish message over channel, thing should send following request:

```bash
curl -s -S -i --cacert docker/ssl/certs/ca.crt --cert docker/ssl/certs/thing.crt --key docker/ssl/certs/thing.key -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/senml+json" -H "Authorization: Thing <thing_secret>" https://localhost/http/channels/<channel_id>/messages -d '[{"bn":"some-base-name:","bt":1.276020076001e+09, "bu":"A","bver":5, "n":"voltage","u":"V","v":120.1}, {"n":"current","t":-5,"v":1.2}, {"n":"current","t":-4,"v":1.3}]'
```

Note that if you're going to use senml message format, you should always send messages as an array.

For more information about the HTTP messaging service API, please check out the [API documentation][http-api].

## MQTT

> To send and receive messages over MQTT you could use [Mosquitto tools][mosquitto], or [Paho][paho] if you want to use MQTT over WebSocket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To send and receive messages over MQTT, you can use [Mosquitto tools][mosquitto]. If you prefer to use MQTT over WebSocket, you can use [Paho][paho].
```

> The following environmental variables are used to enable or disable MQTT with TLS and MTLS: `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_CERT_FILE`, `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_KEY_FILE`, `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_SERVER_CA_FILE`, `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_CLIENT_CA_FILE`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following environment variables are used to enable or disable MQTT with TLS and MTLS: `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_CERT_FILE`, `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_KEY_FILE`, `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_SERVER_CA_FILE`, `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_CLIENT_CA_FILE`.
```

### Without TLS

> To use magistala mqtt without TLS, comment all of the listed environment variables provided above. To publish message over channel, thing should call following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use magistala mqtt without TLS, comment all of the listed environment variables provided above. To publish message over channel, thing should send following request:
```

```bash
mosquitto_pub --id-prefix magistrala -u <thing_id> -P <thing_secret> -t channels/<channel_id>/messages -h localhost -m '[{"bn":"some-base-name:","bt":1.276020076001e+09, "bu":"A","bver":5, "n":"voltage","u":"V","v":120.1}, {"n":"current","t":-5,"v":1.2}, {"n":"current","t":-4,"v":1.3}]'
```

> To subscribe to channel, thing should call following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To subscribe to channel, thing should send following request:
```

```bash
mosquitto_sub --id-prefix magistrala -u <thing_id> -P <thing_secret> -t channels/<channel_id>/messages -h localhost
```

### With TLS

To use magistala mqtt with TLS, uncomment the following environment variables: `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_CERT_FILE`, `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_KEY_FILE` and comment out the rest. To publish message over channel, thing should call following command:

```bash
mosquitto_pub --id-prefix magistrala --cafile docker/ssl/certs/ca.crt -u <thing_id> -P <thing_secret> -t channels/<channel_id>/messages -h localhost -p 1883 -m '[{"bn":"some-base-name:","bt":1.276020076001e+09, "bu":"A","bver":5, "n":"voltage","u":"V","v":120.1}, {"n":"current","t":-5,"v":1.2}, {"n":"current","t":-4,"v":1.3}]'
```

To subscribe to channel, thing should call following command:

```bash
mosquitto_sub --id-prefix magistrala --cafile docker/ssl/certs/ca.crt -u <thing_id> -P <thing_secret> -t channels/<channel_id>/messages -h localhost -p 1883
```

### With MTLS

> Uncomment out all of the above mentioned environment variables to enable MTLS certificates. Here is an example of how you would publish:

Reviewer 2: For consistency you could use the format you used above; `To subscribe to channel, thing should call following command:`

Reviewer: I think it would be better to use: `To subscribe to channel, thing should send following request:`

Reviewer: I think it would be better to use: `To subscribe to channel, thing should send following request:` like you suggested in one of the comments above

```bash

> mosquitto_pub --id-prefix magistrala -u <thing_id> -P <thing_secret> -t channels/<channel_id>/messages -h localhost -p 1883 -m '[{"bn":"some-base-name:","bt":1.276020076001e+09, "bu":"A","bver":5, "n":"voltage","u":"V","v":120.1}, {"n":"current","t":-5,"v":1.2}, {"n":"current","t":-4,"v":1.3}]' --cafile docker/ssl/certs/ca.crt --cert docker/ssl/certs/thing.crt --key docker/ssl/certs/thing.key

Reviewer 2: For consistency with other flags you can consider using the shorthand -I

```

> Here is how you would subscribe:

Reviewer 2: Same as above.

For quick testing you can use [HiveMQ UI tool][websocket-client].

> The following environmental variables are used to enable or disable MQTT-over-WS with TLS and MTLS: `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_CERT_FILE`,`MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_KEY_FILE`, `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_SERVER_CA_FILE`, `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_CLIENT_CA_FILE`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following environment variables are used to enable or disable MQTT-over-WS with TLS and MTLS: `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_CERT_FILE`,`MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_KEY_FILE`, `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_SERVER_CA_FILE`, `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_CLIENT_CA_FILE`.
```

client.connect({ onSuccess: onConnect });
```

## Examples using Eclipse Paho lib in Go.

### Without TLS

Comment out all of the above mentioned environment variables to disable TLS certificates.

> Here is an example of how you would publish:

Reviewer 2: Could you try: 
Here is an example of a go program connecting to Magistrala server and sending  messages over MQTT without TLS using paho mqtt library:

    thingID       = "1255616f-d9ff-4fb4-b2d9-f72a7c99438e"
    thingSecret   = "91f6e004-9f9e-4f95-9b72-a04befbdf584"
    channelID     = "17c1bb45-7dc7-44eb-a2b4-57a16e4bc05b"
    topic		  = "channels/" + channelID + "/messages"
)

func main() {
    opts := mqtt.NewClientOptions()
    opts.AddBroker(brokerAddress)
    opts.SetClientID(thingID)
    opts.SetUsername(thingID)
    opts.SetPassword(thingSecret)

	client, err := Connect(opts, nil)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	publish(client)
    client.Disconnect(250)
}

func Connect(opts *mqtt.ClientOptions, tlsCfg *tls.Config) (mqtt.Client, error) {
	fmt.Println("Connecting to broker")
	if tlsCfg != nil {
		opts.SetTLSConfig(tlsCfg)
	}

	client := mqtt.NewClient(opts)

	if token := client.Connect(); token.Wait() && token.Error() != nil {
		fmt.Println("Failed to connect to broker")
		return client, token.Error()
	}
	return client, nil
}

func publish(client mqtt.Client) {
	fmt.Println("Publishing message")
    text := "MQTT over WS Demo"
    token := client.Publish(topic, 0, false, text)
    token.Wait()
    if token.Error() != nil {
        fmt.Printf("Failed to publish to topic")
        panic(token.Error())
    }
}

> 

Reviewer 3: Add expected output

```

### With TLS

> Uncomment out the following environment variables: `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_CERT_FILE`,`MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_KEY_FILE` and comment out the rest to enable TLS certificates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Uncomment  the following environment variables: `MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_CERT_FILE`,`MG_MQTT_ADAPTER_WS_KEY_FILE` and comment out the rest to enable TLS certificates.
```

	errLoadCerts    = errors.New("failed to load certificates")
	errLoadServerCA = errors.New("failed to load Server CA")
	errLoadClientCA = errors.New("failed to load Client CA")
	errAppendCA     = errors.New("failed to append root ca tls.Config")
)

func main() {
	opts := mqtt.NewClientOptions()
	opts.AddBroker(brokerAddress)
	opts.SetClientID(thingID)
	opts.SetUsername(thingID)
	opts.SetPassword(thingSecret)

	tlsCfg, err := LoadTLS(certFile, keyFile, serverCAFile, clientCAFile)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	client, err := Connect(opts, tlsCfg)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	publish(client)
	client.Disconnect(250)
}

func Connect(opts *mqtt.ClientOptions, tlsCfg *tls.Config) (mqtt.Client, error) {
	if tlsCfg != nil {
		opts.SetTLSConfig(tlsCfg)
	}

	client := mqtt.NewClient(opts)

	if token := client.Connect(); token.Wait() && token.Error() != nil {
		fmt.Println("Failed to connect to broker")
		return client, token.Error()
	}
	return client, nil
}

func publish(client mqtt.Client) {
	text := "MQTT over WS Demo"
	token := client.Publish(topic, 0, false, text)
	token.Wait()
	if token.Error() != nil {
		fmt.Printf("Failed to publish to topic")
		panic(token.Error())
	}
}

> // Load return a TLS configuration that can be used in TLS servers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// LoadTLS returns a TLS configuration that can be used in TLS servers
```

	// Load Certs and Key if available
	if certFile != "" || keyFile != "" {
		certificate, err := tls.LoadX509KeyPair(certFile, keyFile)
		if err != nil {
			return nil, errors.Join(errLoadCerts, err)
		}
		tlsConfig = &tls.Config{
			Certificates: []tls.Certificate{certificate},
		}
		tlsConfig.ClientAuth = tls.RequireAndVerifyClientCert
	}

	// Load Server CA if available
	rootCA, err := loadCertFile(serverCAFile)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, errors.Join(errLoadServerCA, err)
	}
	if len(rootCA) > 0 {
		if tlsConfig.RootCAs == nil {
			tlsConfig.RootCAs = x509.NewCertPool()
		}
		if !tlsConfig.RootCAs.AppendCertsFromPEM(rootCA) {
			return nil, errAppendCA
		}
	}

	// Load Client CA if available
	clientCA, err := loadCertFile(clientCAFile)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, errors.Join(errLoadClientCA, err)
	}
	if len(clientCA) > 0 {
		if tlsConfig.ClientCAs == nil {
			tlsConfig.ClientCAs = x509.NewCertPool()
		}
		if !tlsConfig.ClientCAs.AppendCertsFromPEM(clientCA) {
			return nil, errAppendCA
		}
	}
	return tlsConfig, nil
}

func loadCertFile(certFile string) ([]byte, error) {
	if certFile != "" {
		return os.ReadFile(certFile)
	}
	return []byte{}, nil
}

> 

Reviewer 3: same

```

### With MTLS

> Uncomment out all of the above mentioned environment variables to enable MTLS certificates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Uncomment all of the above mentioned environment variables to enable MTLS certificates.
```

	errLoadCerts    = errors.New("failed to load certificates")
	errLoadServerCA = errors.New("failed to load Server CA")
	errLoadClientCA = errors.New("failed to load Client CA")
	errAppendCA     = errors.New("failed to append root ca tls.Config")
)

func main() {
	opts := mqtt.NewClientOptions()
	opts.AddBroker(brokerAddress)
	opts.SetClientID(thingID)
	opts.SetUsername(thingID)
	opts.SetPassword(thingSecret)

	tlsCfg, err := LoadTLS(certFile, keyFile, serverCAFile, clientCAFile)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	client, err := Connect(opts, tlsCfg)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	publish(client)
	client.Disconnect(250)
}

func Connect(opts *mqtt.ClientOptions, tlsCfg *tls.Config) (mqtt.Client, error) {
	if tlsCfg != nil {
		opts.SetTLSConfig(tlsCfg)
	}

	client := mqtt.NewClient(opts)

	if token := client.Connect(); token.Wait() && token.Error() != nil {
		fmt.Println("Failed to connect to broker")
		return client, token.Error()
	}
	return client, nil
}

func publish(client mqtt.Client) {
	text := "MQTT over WS Demo"
	token := client.Publish(topic, 0, false, text)
	token.Wait()
	if token.Error() != nil {
		fmt.Printf("Failed to publish to topic")
		panic(token.Error())
	}
}

> // Load return a TLS configuration that can be used in TLS servers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// LoadTLS returns a TLS configuration that can be used in TLS servers
```
